Welcome to the Life Church Podcast.
We are in Acts 2 4 to 2 community, a family on a mission to bring a life of Jesus to warranty.
We hope you're ready to hear what God has to say to you today through His Word and by His Spirit.
I'll do my best.
And the passage that we've been, essentially we've been given when we've prepared is Romans chapter 5 verse 8, and it says this, but God demonstrates His own love for us in this.
While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
It's a very short verse in terms of words, but it's also an utterly profound truth that I'm going to try and unpack.
And I'm going to start by splitting these verses down and delving into each one.
So the first one, but God demonstrates his own love for us in this.
So I want to start by defining God's love and how it is expressed.
So in English, we have only one word for love.
but it can have many different meanings.
So we can love our husbands or wives, we can love sports, we can love a cheeky nandos.
We know what we mean when we use that one word in English.
In Greek, which is a language the New Testament is written in.
There's not only one word for love, there's in fact four, all separate and different, each with their own distinct meanings.
I'm just gonna apply those meanings to my own life just to show the difference between them.
So you have the four here, so you have
Eros, which is romantic love.
That's the way in which I love my wife.
Have Storgay.
That's affectionate or familiar love.
I've got two nephews and a niece who I have great affection for.
Felia.
Now, this is a love between friends.
I'm impressed to have blessed to have some very close friendships with people, some of whom are here.
And Agape.
Now, this is the love that Paul's talking about in this passage.
And this is the supreme self-giving, self-sacrificing love that puts others above itself.
Now, culture and society often speaks about love in many different ways.
You have poems, plays, books, songs, films.
Now, if you had to pick one of these four types of love, which one do we think our society and culture focuses on the most?
Which form is held up as the highest and best expression of love?
So I would say Eros.
So romantic love.
It's the form of love that everyone talks about.
It's the form of love no one wants to miss out on.
It's the form of love that we can feel as though if we aren't experiencing it, then we aren't really experiencing love.
Is romantic love is eros, the highest form of love imaginable?
Our culture says yes.
Jesus says no.
If you read in John chapter 15,
Verses 12 to 13, it says this, my command is this, this is Jesus speaking to his disciples.
Love and none, love each other as I have loved you.
Greater love has no one than this.
To get married, how are they?
No.
Says this, greater love has no one than this.
To lay down one's life for one's friends.
Greater love has no one than this to lay down your life.
Jesus doesn't say there's no greater love than getting married.
According to Jesus, the greatest form of love is laying down your life self-sacrificially for others as he demonstrates not long after he speaks this to his disciples.
That's true agape love.
That's the highest form of love.
Agape is so much greater than the other three, so much so that when you apply agape love to the other three, it enhances all of them.
So if you love sacrificially in romantic relationships, you'll have better marriages and relationships.
If you love sacrificially within your family and towards your children, you'll have stronger bonds with them.
If you love your friends sacrificially, you'll have richer and more meaningful relationships and friendships.
So when this verse talks about God demonstrating his love, the love we're talking about is agape.
So I recently listened to a podcast where there was an exchange between a Christian bishop
and an atheist who was hosting this podcast and they were discussing partway through about love and how we explain the nature of it.
And the atheist was trying to explain love in purely biological and materialistic terms.
Purpose is leaving no room for any kind of divine input.
The whole point of his saying was that you can explain, you don't need divine love, you can explain it a way it can be chemical, it can be biological, it's just things in our heads, there's nothing special or there's no higher plane regarding it.
So for example, we only love our partners and our children because our job as organisms on this planet is to propagate our genes, just like animals.
So we only really want to love and protect them so that our genetic material has the chance to pass on down the generations and thrive.
When it comes to loving other friends or neighbours or the members of the family, well, that's simply self-interest, he said.
As a community, we must all work together to survive.
So having a good reputation among friends is important, so we mutually cooperate.
There were more explanations and I'm not a scientist so I'm not going to go into all of them.
But essentially what this atheist's podcast was saying was that love can be boiled down to a pragmatic survival instinct that protects your ability to pass on your genetic material.
That's the point.
There's nothing greater.
There's nothing higher.
It's simply a survival mechanism.
And the bishop listened graciously to these naturalistic explanations of love.
He then told the atheist a story of a Franciscan friar
in World War II called Maximilian Kolb, who I have a picture of here.
So during the war, Maximilian was captured by the Nazis for helping to hide Jews.
And he was taken to Auschwitz, which is the notorious Nazi death camp, where he served as a priest helping others.
And while he was at Auschwitz in August 1941, a prisoner escaped from the camp.
In retaliation for this escape, the camp commandant selected 10 men from the camp at random.
These 10 men were to be executed by being put on an underground bunker and left there till they starved to death.
Maximilian was present when this happened, but he was not one of the 10 men chosen, and he didn't know any of them who they were.
They were all strangers to him.
And as the men began to be dragged away to their deaths, one man cried out that he had a wife and a child.
Maximilian calmly stepped forward and asked the commandant if he could take this man's place instead.
He didn't know the man, he had no connection with him whatsoever.
The common dance agreed and Maximilian was taken to his death.
And after the bishop had finished this story, with the atheist podcast that it is very best to try and explain why anybody might do this in purely naturalistic terms.
It flew in the face of everything he had previously said about why love is essentially purely a selfish biological process.
It perhaps shouldn't come as a surprise to us that an atheist would struggle to explain what might motivate this kind of divine agape love.
And essentially, Trizy might.
He had no answer because that kind of love is divine.
It's not naturalistic.
It's not chemicals in your head.
And that kind of example proved it very, very well.
So this is the same kind of love that God demonstrates to us in action, not words.
Jesus sets this standard of divine love for His disciples.
He then immediately goes on to demonstrate it to them by dying on the cross in their place.
He perfectly demonstrates self-giving sacrificial love.
God demonstrates His love for us by making a way for us to be in relationship with Him.
God so desires relationship with us, He was willing to endure His Son being murdered by sinners so those same sinners could come to Him.
Without this demonstration of love,
It would be impossible for any of us to come to Jesus.
I'll expand on this on my neck points.
The second point is this, while we were yet sinners.
Okay.
So what is a sinner?
So upon here, so a sinner is essentially in the Greek, it is about, it's a word that means missing the mark.
Okay.
So essentially what it means is it's either someone who's broken a religious or moral law, or someone who has missed the mark.
So in Jesus' day, essentially what would happen was that you're expected to kind of separate yourself from sinners.
You would be made unclean by them.
We've got a very short story about this, which is regarding a friend of mine, he's a good friend of mine.
Many years ago at Lifechurch, I invited some people out to a pub to hang out, just for fun.
I didn't invite my friend, though we're very close.
I can't remember why, but it's nothing, not because I'd fallen out.
I'd just forgotten to invite him.
Turned out that my friend on that same night had gone out with his wife and his parents-in-law, and they happened to come to the very same place that we were
slightly awkward.
So when we walked in, like, oh, hello, you know, et cetera, had a bit of a laugh about it.
But my friend was actually slightly a little bit bothered.
We were still friends.
It's fine.
And he's on the way home and the car.
And he's talking to his wife.
And she's like, just, it's nothing.
They just let it go.
It's fine.
Doesn't mean anything.
You've been friends for ages.
My friend couldn't shake this idea.
And he went to sleep still thinking about it.
And he had a dream about it.
And my friend has very vivid dreams.
And
During this dream, he was in church with me, and he was trying to get me to explain, why had I not invited him?
Why had I not brought him along?
And I apparently looked at him very seriously in this dream and said, do you really want to know why?
I said, yeah, I do.
And apparently in the dream, because I would never say this in real life, I walked towards him, put my face in his and said, because you're a sinner.
That is not who I am, but that is what happened in the dream.
So, but it's kind of, that was the attitude of the day.
So if you're a sinner, you're over here, I'm over here, you're unclean, you're unholy.
I don't want to take myself by association with you.
I'm going to stay over here.
That's exactly what the Pharisees and religious leaders did.
That's not what Jesus does.
And he tells us why in Matthew chapter 9, verses 12 to 13,
So when the teachers of the law who were Pharisees saw a meeting with the sinners and tax collectors, they asked his disciples, why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?
On hearing this, Jesus said to them, it is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.
Now you know if you read any of the gospels that when Jesus was teaching throughout his ministry, throughout those three years,
He was constantly correcting the faulty interpretations and incorrect teachings of the day, usually the ones that the Pharisees themselves held to.
Jesus tells us it's not come to abolish the law but to fulfill it and interpret it correctly.
And the religious and legal experts are always arguing with him about it and trying to catch him out.
They challenge him publicly regularly with questions that weren't sincere but were designed to try and show him up.
And want us to pay attention to this point, looking at the scripture.
Jesus has no problem correcting the religious leaders and the faulty interpretations and he doesn't care how upset they get in the process.
He actually is, they tried to stone him at least twice before he's crucified.
So Jesus is happy to upset people and correct people.
He has no problem.
In the passage we've just read, Jesus corrects the Pharisees faulty understanding of mercy and grace and why he is not tainted by sinners and he will actually go and spend time with them.
But if you notice, there's one assertion made by the Pharisees that he doesn't correct.
Jesus acknowledges the fact that the people he is spending time with are in fact sinners.
He doesn't correct that assertion.
He doesn't say, come on, they're not sinners.
What are you talking about?
He doesn't say, are you awful judgmental Pharisees?
They're not sinners.
How dare you make them feel guilty and judge them in this way?
It's a terrible thing to call them.
No.
He doesn't correct them on that point.
Both the Pharisees and Jesus agree on the fact that these people are sinners.
They are separated from God and they are lost.
Jesus doesn't deny or contest it.
What he corrects is their attitude towards them.
He shows that these are exactly the people God cares about and wants to save from their sin.
In fact, that's exactly why he has come to dwell among us in the first place.
We know from John chapter three that he didn't send his son into the world to condemn it, but to save it.
He's going to the people who the Pharisees turn away from them and criticizing them because they won't engage with the lost.
Jesus knows that the sinners he spends time with are under God's judgment and wrath, but he refuses to leave them there.
He pursues them and loves them and he doesn't care about other people's perception of him while he does it.
One thing I want to look at before I move on to my last point is this.
We've defined what it is to be a sinner and acknowledge that we're guilty of sinning against God.
But the key part of the Scripture is this, while we were sinners, Christ died for us.
While we were still sinners, God hasn't waited for us to get our act together, start behaving ourselves properly, before He acted in supreme sacrificial love towards us.
He demonstrated His love for us while we were still His enemies, while we were still unholy, while we were still opposed to His will.
This is one of the most unique cornerstones of the Christian faith.
loving ones enemies.
Jesus lays out why in Matthew chapter 5 verses 43 to 48.
You have heard that it was said, love your neighbor and hate your enemy.
But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you, that you may be children of your father in heaven.
He causes his son to rise on the evil and the good and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
If you love those who love you, what reward will you get?
Are not even the tax collectors doing that?
And if you agree only your own people, what are you doing more than others?
Do not even pagans do that.
Be perfect therefore, as your heavenly father is perfect.
Okay, so I think sometimes we don't realize what an incredible teaching that is.
We kind of, if you brought up in church, like I was,
You sort of go, oh yes, we love our enemies, it's very hard.
Nothing like this existed before.
This isn't even in the Old Testament that Jesus actually corrects and says, love your friends, hate your enemies.
That's what you do.
For Jesus to essentially turn that around is so radical, you'd struggle to get your head around it.
And what he teaches is there's merit before God in loving people who hate you, who oppose you, who persecute you.
It's genius because what he says is, well, think about it.
Even the worst kinds of sinners and unbelievers are capable of loving people who love them back.
He says, if you really want to express perfect agape love like your father, then practice loving your enemies.
Okay.
Well, why?
Because that's how God reaches us.
And it's how he wants us to reach others.
Says in Romans chapter two that God's kindness is designed to lead us towards repentance, that we should be so moved by God's mercy and grace towards us that we want to follow and please him.
The love and grace of God is demonstrated to us first, precisely when we don't deserve it.
Jesus says to let you light shine before others that they may see your good deeds and glorify God.
Our actions in loving our enemies, just how God loved us when we were His enemies, draws people.
It's crazy and it's radical and it's attractive.
While we were sinners, breakers of the law, enemies of God with no defense for our sin, Jesus chose to demonstrate His perfect love for us by dying on the cross.
And the third point here, Christ died for us.
I'm gonna sort of raise a question, which is this.
What did Jesus need to die for?
And why did he need to die?
Sometimes a controversial question, it can sometimes be a controversial question even in Christian circles.
And a frequent criticism of those who don't believe in God is to say, well, why can't God just decide to forgive?
Okay, God is love after all.
Why can't he simply overlook our sin if he wants so badly to be in relationship with us and the sin is what's in the way?
Why can't he just ignore that and look past it?
He's God, he's all powerful.
Why does he have to go through his whole plan of Jesus dying on a cross?
Surely God can think of a better way than to have to sacrifice his own son.
Why doesn't God just snap his fingers and forgive us and save us?
And the problem, if you can call it a problem, is this.
God is bound
by his very nature and character to punish sin and wickedness.
He must do so, otherwise he's not a good or just God.
There's a quote from Harvard theologian, I'm gonna read, he's called Miraslav Volf, and he described himself as someone who used to struggle with the idea of God's wrath against humans for their sin.
If God was love, he reasoned, surely he couldn't be angry and wrathful as well, that's a contradiction.
And he continued to struggle with this tension until he closely witnessed such evil and wickedness that it changed his mind.
I'm going to read a quote from him.
It's from his book and the book is called Free of Charge.
And he says this, I used to think that wrath was unworthy of God.
Isn't God love?
Shouldn't divine love be beyond wrath?
God is love and God loves every person and every creature.
That's exactly
why God is wrathful against some of them.
My last resistance to the idea of God's wrath was a casualty of the war in the former Yugoslavia, the region from which I come.
According to some estimates, 200,000 people were killed and over 3 million were displaced.
My villages and cities were destroyed.
My people shelled day in and day out.
Some of them brutalized beyond imagination.
And I could not imagine God not being angry.
Well, think of Rwanda in the last decade of the past century, where 800,000 people were hacked to death in 100 days.
How did God react to the carnage?
By doting on the perpetrators in a grandparently fashion, by refusing to condemn the bloodbath, but instead affirming the perpetrators basic goodness.
Wasn't God fiercely angry with them?
Though I used to complain about the indecency of the idea of God's wrath.
I came to think that I would have to rebel against a God who wasn't wrathful at the sight of the world's evil.
God isn't wrathful in spite of being love.
God is wrathful because God is love.
I believe there's one person who really understood what God's wrath against sin and his grace and love for sinners meant.
And I think this person knew and experienced this better than anyone ever has or ever will.
That's my opinion.
That's not a statement of fact, but I do think that's the case and I'll explain why.
This person is not a great academic theologian.
They're not a famous thinker.
They're not a hero of the faith.
In fact, we don't even know the name.
So I'm going to read from Luke chapter 23 verses 39 to 42.
And this is the scene.
of Jesus's crucifixion.
Jesus has been crucified alongside two of the convicted criminals.
You're probably familiar with the story.
One on either side of him.
And people are mocking Jesus, telling him to bring himself down from the cross if he really is God.
So you have the religious leaders and the stood off at a distance and they're growing and gloating and mocking and saying, well, you know, you performed all this miracles.
You're the Messiah.
Come on.
Let's see something.
It says this, one of the criminals who hung there hurled insults at him.
Aren't you the Messiah?
Save yourself and us.
But the other criminal rebuked him.
Don't you fear God?
He said.
Since you were under the same sentence, we are punished justly.
We are getting what our deeds deserve, but this man has done nothing wrong.
Then he said, Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.
Jesus answered him, truly, I tell you, today you will be with me in paradise.
There's three things I want to take from this.
First one is recognition.
This is what he says, we are punished justly for we are getting what our deeds deserve, but this man has done nothing wrong.
There's no argument from the second thief.
There's no excuses.
There's only an acknowledgement.
He doesn't have a leg to stand on.
We can say we're a good person.
We're not that bad.
We can get angry with God because we don't like his judgment.
But the fact remains, as it says in Romans and as we read last week, that
we are separated from God and deserving of punishment no matter how we might feel about it.
The thief recognizes that Jesus is innocent.
He recognizes he may deserve this punishment, but Jesus does not.
Realization.
So one criminal,
The first one wants something from Jesus.
He acts like Jesus owes him something.
What he's saying is like the religious leader saying, come on, get me off this cross, do something.
If you're God, you need to do what I want now, okay?
The other criminal rebukes him and says, don't you fear God since you're under the same sentence?
He's like, seriously?
Don't you have any humility given your current situation?
Don't act like this Jesus owes us anything.
The second thief realizes it's foolish to demand things of God that you have no right to ask for.
God doesn't owe us anything, okay?
Now we don't mean by that there aren't promises of God that he gives to us out of faithfulness, but what I mean is everything that we receive from God, we don't earn it.
We can't demand it, we're not owed it, okay?
God doesn't owe us anything whether we're Christian or not.
Everything we receive from God is a good gift because of his generosity.
It's one of the criticisms I have.
I'm not going to get too much into this of prosperity theology, which is the health, wealth and prosperity that essentially means that you give a certain amount of money or you give this and then God will give something back.
Essentially treats God like a cosmic slot machine, which is why I don't like it.
But one of the things that I really don't like about it is that there's a hint that God owes us something.
There's a hint that, well, we give something here.
Well, God sort of has to give us something back, doesn't he?
You know, God, he kind of owes us something.
If you're giving this really, you know, it's almost like, well, God has to give us something back.
Whether we deserve it or not, it's about the fact we don't.
Like I said, cosmic slot machine, we put stuff in and God gives us stuff back and that is not how it works.
I often wake up in the morning and get a strong instruction from the Holy Spirit to thank God.
I give him thanks that I'm waking up in a worn bed.
I can go downstairs and get food and drink that isn't scarce.
I'm married, I have a job.
All of these things are gifts from God that I don't deserve.
God doesn't owe me any single thing of that.
He gives them to me because of his generous nature, not because I've done anything to earn it.
The last one here I'm going to look at is reaching.
And the second thief says, Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.
And the thief says to Jesus, your kingdom, did you notice that?
Your kingdom.
What that says to me is this thief, the second thief, doesn't expect to be going where Jesus is going.
He thinks that Jesus' kingdom is not for a man like him to enter.
Do you remember what the first thief said when he wanted something from Jesus?
He demanded to be taken with Jesus.
He said, come with me, get yourself off this cross and take me with you.
Come on, do something.
What does the second thief ask Jesus to do?
Just remember me.
The second thief says, I know you're going into your kingdom, your kingdom.
I know I've no right to ask you to take me with you because I don't deserve it.
Just please remember me.
And the most beautiful reply, this thief in agony and close to death could ever have heard comes back to his ears.
Jesus answered him, truly, I tell you, today you will be with me in paradise.
Jesus says to the second thief, because of the love I'm demonstrating right now, there is a way for you to join me.
I see your humility.
I see your acknowledgement of your sin and failure.
And I see you reaching to me, knowing I only hope with no expectation, no demand.
just to hope that you're generous enough to treat me with grace.
You didn't demand entry into my kingdom.
You expected that you alone would be bearing the consequences of your own sin.
Well, says Jesus, there's good news.
I've paid that penalty for you.
So you're coming with me.
There's one last verse I want to finish with.
It's a verse from a song called Love and Carner
by Stuart Townen, and I think it sums up well what I've spoken about today.
There are eight lines, typically by the fifth or sixth one is when I start choking up, so put your bets in now as to when that will happen.
So he says this, flipping it already.
Is what?
Anybody?
As a sheet before the shearer, you were silent in your pain.
You endured humiliation at the hands of those you'd made.
And as hell unleashed its fury, you were lifted on a tree.
Crying, Father, God, forgive them.
Place their punishment on me.
That's the essence, I hope, of what I've spoken about today.
That while we were still sinners, God demonstrates his love for us, and he died for us to make a way.
We've come to the end of this week's message.
We hope you've been impacted and inspired.
Please keep up to date with everything that's happening by visiting our website at www.livechurch.com.